---
title: Insert title here
key: a0e4ad5a4283c048911ea362f864a109

---
## Welcome to Intermediate SQL!

```yaml
type: "TitleSlide"
key: "53ba8382f9"
```

`@lower_third`

name: Mona Khalil
title: Curriculum Lead, DataCamp


`@script`
Hello, and welcome to Intermediate SQL. My name is Mona Khalil. I am a Curriculum Lead with DataCamp, and I will be your instructor for this course.

SQL, or structured query language, is a powerful tool for working with relational databases. With an intermediate knowledge of SQL, you will gain the ability to shape, transform, and manipulate data from multiple tables in a relational database to answer a robust set of data science questions.


---
## Topics covered:

```yaml
type: "FullSlide"
key: "58ec1d3eb9"
center_content: false
```

`@part1`
- CASE / CASE WHEN statements
- Simple subqueries
- Correlated subqueries
- Window functions (OVER, PARTITION BY, UNBOUNDED PRECEDING, UNBOUNDED FOLLOWING, CURRENT ROW)


`@script`
In this course, you will learn how to shape, transform, and manipulate data using (1) the CASE function, (2) simple subqueries, (3) correlated subqueries, and (4) window functions.


---
## Prerequisites

```yaml
type: "TwoRows"
key: "5c4ffd2886"
```

`@part1`
- Intro to SQL for Data Science
```SQL 
SELECT user_id, SUM(sales) 
FROM sales_data
WHERE user_id BETWEEN 300 AND 400
GROUP BY user_id;
```


`@part2`
- Joining Tables in PostgreSQL
```SQL
SELECT c.country, c.team, sum(m.goals)
FROM countries AS c
LEFT JOIN matches AS m
ON c.team_id = m.home_team_id
WHERE m.year > 1990
GROUP BY c.country, c.team
```


`@script`
Before taking this course, you should be comfortable working with the topics covered in our Intro to SQL for Data Science course, such as SELECT statements that include arithmetic functions, GROUP BY functions, and use WHERE clauses to filter data. 

You should also be familiar with concepts discussed in the Joining Tables in PostgreSQL, such as the LEFT JOIN, RIGHT JOIN, INNER and OUTER joins. In Intermediate SQL, we will be building upon many topics discussed during that course.


---
## Selecting from the European Soccer Database

```yaml
type: "FullSlide"
key: "9bd5950c69"
```

`@part1`
```SQL
SELECT 
    c.name AS Country,
    COUNT(m.country_id)
FROM
    Country AS c
LEFT JOIN Match AS m ON
    c.country_id = m.country_id
GROUP BY
    c.name;
```


`@script`
The first topic you will learn in this course is CASE statements. CASE statements are a simplified means of testing multiple logical conditions and returning a single value for a row. 

For example, the query here extracts data from the European Soccer Database, which lists information about over 25,000 matches played in Europe between 2008 and 2016. The statement you see gives the number of matches played in each country listed in the main "Country" table.


---
## Selecting from the European Soccer Database

```yaml
type: "FullSlide"
key: "f31c2216be"
```

`@part1`
```SQL
SELECT 
    c.name AS Country,
    COUNT(m.country_id)
FROM
    Country AS c
LEFT JOIN Match AS m ON
    c.country_id = m.country_id
WHERE 
    c.EXTRACT(year FROM m.date) IN (2010, 2014)
GROUP BY c.name;
```


`@script`
If we want to count the number of matches played in the 2 years leading up to a world cup season, we could add filters to the data using a "WHERE" clause.

However, that won't exactly give us the data we need. Setting up multiple queries with filter criteria that cancel each other out is inefficient.


---
## CASE statements

```yaml
type: "FullSlide"
key: "d58fa3c487"
```

`@part1`
CASE / CASE WHEN
- SQL's "IF" statement
- Contains a WHEN, THEN, and ELSE statement, finished with END

```SQL
CASE WHEN x = 1 THEN a 
     WHEN x = 2 THEN b
     ELSE c END
```


`@script`
This is where the "CASE" statement comes in. Case statements are SQL's version of an "IF" statement. 

The first part of the statement tests a given condition, say, x = 1. If this condition is TRUE, then it returns the item you specify after your THEN statement. 

You can create multiple conditions by listing WHEN and THEN statements within the same statement. The CASE statement is then ended with an ELSE condition (say, if the first 2 WHEN statements are not true).

When you have completed your statement, be sure to include the term END. The completed case statement will evaluate to one column in SQL.


---
## CASE WHEN

```yaml
type: "FullSlide"
key: "07cef58230"
```

`@part1`
```SQL
SELECT 
    c.name AS Country,
    CASE WHEN EXTRACT(year FROM m.date) = 2010
         THEN "2010"
         WHEN EXTRACT(year FROM m.date) = 2014
         THEN "2014" 
         ELSE "Other" END AS year_group,
    COUNT(m.country_id)
FROM
    Country AS c
LEFT JOIN Match AS m ON
    c.country_id = m.country_id
GROUP BY 
    c.name,
    CASE WHEN EXTRACT(year FROM m.date) BETWEEN 2009 AND 2010
         THEN "2009-2010"
         WHEN EXTRACT(year FROM m.date) BETWEEN 2013 AND 2014
         THEN "2013-2014" 
         ELSE "Other" END;
```


`@script`
In this example, we use a CASE statement to create a new variable that groups the count of matches in the years 2010 and 2014 -- the years of two world cup tournaments.

This case statement gives us a new column with the values "2010", "2014", and "Other", and the count of matches for each of these new categories.


---
## Let's Practice!

```yaml
type: "FinalSlide"
key: "a51f65b966"
```

`@script`
In the next lesson, we will practice more ways of structuring CASE statements using arithmetic functions such as COUNT, SUM, and AVERAGE. For now, you will practice creating CASE statements to build categories for grouping data.

